# VSS as Schema for EU Data Act

## Introduction

The EA Data Act is a new EU regulation intended to make data more accessible, fair, and usable, especially for data generated by connected devices and digital services in the EU. 
The Data Act came into force in January 2024, with most provisions applying from September 12th 2025. Technical requirements for device designs to allow direct user access apply from September 12th 2026.
## Challenge

The Data Act gives users (consumers and businesses) the right to access data they produce and share it with third parties of their choice, either directly or by instructing the data holder (often the manufacturer or service provider) to do so.

We have assumed that over time third parties will demand common standards for structuring of the data made available rather than have to adapt to proprietary data formats from different data holders (often the OEMs). This demand will most likely lead to industry specific standards for the format being specified by EU. Therefore we think it is better to be ahead of that and propose an existing defined format to be used in the context of the Data Act.

## Why VSS?

There does exist a number of potential specifications and standards that could be chosen but we decided early that the **COVESA** (The Connected Vehicle Systems Alliance) **VSS** (Vehicle Signal Specification) based on
- **Openness and Extendibility**: Being Open Source removes license fees and similar hurdles, it is controlled by the COVESA members and community, and it is easily extendable if one needs to e.g. add proprietary vehicle signals. 
- **Standardization and Interoperability**: VSS offers a standardized, easily understandable, and machine-readable structure for vehicle data, which simplifies data sharing, and enables reduced confusion and integration costs.
- **Faster Time-to-Market**: Since many tools and services can natively support or quickly adopt VSS, using this schema allows for quicker and more efficient development, testing, and deployment of new third-party integrations.
- **Eases Regulatory Compliance**: The standardized approach fosters compliance with data access, transparency, and portability requirements , supporting easier fulfillment of obligations such as third-party sharing in structured formats.
- **Reduction of Vendor Lock-In**: By making data portable and compatible across different platforms and providers, the risk of users or organizations becoming dependent on one supplier or proprietary format lessens.
- **Scalability and Innovation**: Open-source collaboration encourages the creation of new business models, cross-industry partnerships, and innovative services by making structured data more accessible to developers and businesses.
- **Enhances Consumer Trust**: Using a widely recognized schema that supports privacy and transparency can improve end-user confidence in how their vehicle data is being managed and shared with third-parties.

## Recommendation

**We recommend the use of the COVESA VSS as the schema for vehicle-generated data** when shared within the context of EU Data Act as it offers a common, industry-accepted language for defining and exchanging vehicle-generated data, streamlining integration and making it easier for OEMs, service providers, and third parties to collaborate and innovate.

**This recommendation is not enforced** upon the OEMs. It is up to each OEM to take a decision whether to follow this recommendation or to use other schema.


## Links
[The EU Data Act](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L_202302854&qid=1711373839244)
[COVESA Vehicle Signal Specification (Project Page)](https://covesa.global/project/vehicle-signal-specification/)

